lectures/laffer_adaptive.md, before:

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

# Inflation Rate Laffer Curves  with Adaptive Expectations 

## Overview

This lecture studies stationary and dynamic **Laffer curves** in the inflation tax rate in a non-linear version of the model studied in this XXXX lecture.

As in lecture XXXXX, this lecture uses the log-linear version of the demand function for money that Cagan {cite}`Cagan` used in his classic paper in place of the linear demand function used in this XXXX lecture.

But now, instead of assuming  ''rational expectations'' in the form of ''perfect foresight'',
we'll adopt the ''adaptive expectations'' assumption used by Cagan {cite}`Cagan`.



This means that instead of assuming that expected inflation $\pi_t^*$ is described by

$$
\pi_t^* = p_{t+1} - p_t
$$ 

as we assumed in lecture XXXX, we'll now assume that $\pi_t^*$ is determined by the adaptive expectations scheme described in equation {eq}`eq:adaptex`  reported below. 

## The Model

Let  

  * $m_t$ be the log of the money supply at the beginning of time $t$
  * $p_t$ be the log of the price level at time $t$
  * $\pi_t^*$ be the public's expectation of the rate of inflation between $t$ and $t+1$ 
  

The law of motion of the money supply is

$$ 
\exp(m_{t+1}) - \exp(m_t) = g \exp(p_t) 
$$ (eq:msupply)


where $g$ is the part of government expenditures financed by printing money.

Notice that equation {eq}`eq:msupply` implies that

$$
m_{t+1} = \log[ \exp(m_t) + g \exp(p_t)]
$$ (eq:msupply2)

The demand function for money is 

$$
m_{t+1} - p_t = -\alpha \pi_t^* 
$$ (eq:mdemand)

where $\alpha \geq 0$.  



Expectations of inflation are governed by 

HUMPHREY: I CHANGED THE FOLLOWING EQUATION (MARCH 15)

$$
\pi_{t}^* = (1-\delta) (p_t - p_{t-1}) + \delta \pi_{t-1}^*
$$ (eq:adaptex)

where $\delta \in (0,1)$


## Computing An Equilibrium Sequence 

Equation the expressions for $m_{t+1}$ promided  by {eq}`eq:mdemand` and {eq}`eq:msupply2` and use equation {eq}`eq:adaptex` to eliminate $\pi_t^*$ to obtain
the following equation for $p_t$:

$$
\log[ \exp(m_t) + g \exp(p_t)] - p_t = -\alpha [(1-\delta) (p_t - p_{t-1}) + \delta \pi_{t-1}^*]
$$ (eq:pequation)


**Pseudo-code**

Here is pseudo code for our algorithm.

Starting at time $0$ with initial conditions $(m_0, \pi_{-1}^*, p_{-1})$, for each $t \geq 0$
deploy the following steps in order:

* solve {eq}`eq:pequation` for $p_t$
* solve equation {eq}`eq:adaptex` for $\pi_t^*$ 
* solve equation {eq}`eq:msupply2` for $m_{t+1}$

This completes the algorithm.


## Claims or Conjectures
  
  
It will turn out that 

 * if they exist, limiting values $\overline \pi$ and $\overline \mu$ will be equal
 
 * if  limiting values exists, there are two possible limiting values, one high, one low
 
 * unlike the outcome in lecture XXXX, for almost all initial log price levels and expected inflation rates $p_0, \pi_{t}^*$, the limiting $\overline \pi = \overline \mu$ is  the **lower** steady state  value
 
 * for each of the two possible limiting values $\bar \pi$ ,there is a unique initial log price level $p_0$ that implies that $\pi_t = \mu_t = \bar \mu$ for all  $t \geq 0$
 
    * this unique initial log price level solves $\log(\exp(m_0) + g \exp(p_0)) - p_0 = - \alpha \bar \pi $
    
    * the preceding equation for $p_0$ comes from $m_1 - p_0 = -  \alpha \bar \pi$

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

## Limiting Values of Inflation Rate

As in our earlier lecture XXXX, we can compute the two prospective limiting values for $\bar \pi$ by studying the steady-state Laffer curve.

Thus, in a  **steady state** 

$$
m_{t+1} - m_t = p_{t+1} - p_t =  x \quad \forall t ,
$$

where $x > 0 $ is a common rate of growth of logarithms of the money supply and price level.

A few lines of algebra yields the following equation that $x$ satisfies

$$
\exp(-\alpha x) - \exp(-(1 + \alpha) x) = g 
$$ (eq:steadypi)

where we require that

$$
g \leq \max_{x: x \geq 0} \exp(-\alpha x) - \exp(-(1 + \alpha) x) ,  
$$ (eq:revmax)

so that it is feasible to finance $g$ by printing money.

The left side of {eq}`eq:steadypi` is steady state revenue raised by printing money.

The right side of {eq}`eq:steadypi` is the quantity  of time $t$ goods  that the government raises by printing money. 

Soon  we'll plot  the left and right sides of equation {eq}`eq:steadypi`.

But first we'll write code that computes a steady-state
$\bar \pi$.



Let's start by importing some  libraries

```{code-cell} ipython3
from collections import namedtuple
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from matplotlib.ticker import MaxNLocator
from matplotlib.cm import get_cmap
from matplotlib.colors import to_rgba
import matplotlib
from scipy.optimize import root, fsolve
```

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

Let's create a `namedtuple` to store the parameters of the model

```{code-cell} ipython3
LafferAdaptive = namedtuple('LafferAdaptive', 
                        ["m0",  # log of the money supply at t=0
                         "α",   # sensitivity of money demand
                         "g",   # government expenditure
                         "δ"])

# Create a Cagan Laffer model
def create_model(α=0.5, m0=np.log(100), g=0.35, δ=0.9):
    return LafferAdaptive(α=α, m0=m0, g=g, δ=δ)

model = create_model()
```

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

Now we write code that computes steady-state $\bar \pi$s.

```{code-cell} ipython3
# Define formula for π_bar
def solve_π(x, α, g):
    return np.exp(-α * x) - np.exp(-(1 + α) * x) - g

def solve_π_bar(model, x0):
    π_bar = fsolve(solve_π, x0=x0, xtol=1e-10, args=(model.α, model.g))[0]
    return π_bar

# Solve for the two steady state of π
π_l = solve_π_bar(model, x0=0.6)
π_u = solve_π_bar(model, x0=3.0)
print(f'The two steady state of π are: {π_l, π_u}')
```

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

We find two steady state $\bar \pi$ values

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

## Steady State Laffer Curve

The following figure plots the steady state Laffer curve together with the two stationary inflation rates.

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
mystnb:
  figure:
    caption: Seigniorage as function of steady state inflation. The dashed brown lines
      indicate $\pi_l$ and $\pi_u$.
    name: laffer_curve_nonlinear
    width: 500px
---
def compute_seign(x, α):
    return np.exp(-α * x) - np.exp(-(1 + α) * x) 

def plot_laffer(model, πs):
    α, g = model.α, model.g
    
    # Generate π values
    x_values = np.linspace(0, 5, 1000)

    # Compute corresponding seigniorage values for the function
    y_values = compute_seign(x_values, α)

    # Plot the function
    plt.plot(x_values, y_values, 
            label=f'$exp((-{α})x) - exp(- (1- {α}) x)$')
    for π, label in zip(πs, ['$\pi_l$', '$\pi_u$']):
        plt.text(π, plt.gca().get_ylim()[0]*2, 
                 label, horizontalalignment='center',
                 color='brown', size=10)
        plt.axvline(π, color='brown', linestyle='--')
    plt.axhline(g, color='red', linewidth=0.5, 
                linestyle='--', label='g')
    plt.xlabel('$\pi$')
    plt.ylabel('seigniorage')
    plt.legend()
    plt.grid(True)
    plt.show()

# Steady state Laffer curve
plot_laffer(model, (π_l, π_u))
```

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

## Associated Initial Price Levels


HUMPHREY: A TWEAK STARTS HERE MARCH 16

 Now that we have our hands on the two possible steady states, we can compute two initial log price levels $p_{-1}$, which as initial conditions, imply that $\pi_t = \bar \pi $ for all $t \geq 0$.


HUMPHREY: I WANT TO TO ALTER THE FORMULAS FOR THE INITIAL PRICE LEVELs $p_{-1}$ corresponding to
EACH OF OUR CANDIDATE STATIONARY INFLATION RATES $\pi^*$. 

* THE PROPOSED STATIONARY INFLATION RATES SHOULD REMAIN THE SAME AS ABOVE (AND THE SAME AS THOSE FOR THE "RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS" VERSION OF THE MODEL IN OUR EARLIER LECTURE)

HERE IS THE NEW FORMULA FOR THE CANDIDATE INITIAL PRICE LEVEL(S):

$$
p_{-1} = m_0 + \alpha \pi^*
$$

```{code-cell} ipython3
def solve_p_init(model, π_star):
    m0, α = model.m0, model.α
    return m0 + α*π_star


# Compute two initial price levels associated with π_l and π_u
p_l, p_u = map(lambda π: solve_p_init(model, π), (π_l, π_u))
print('Associated initial p_{-1}s', f'are: {p_l, p_u}')
```

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

### Verification 



To start, let's write some code to verify that if the initial log price level $p_{-1}$ takes one
of the two values we just calculated, the inflation rate $\pi_t$ will be constant for all $t \geq 0$.



HUMPHREY: MAYBE THE FOLLOWING CODE WILL HAVE TO BE TWEAKED TO ACCEPT TTHE NEW FORMULA FOR $p_{-1}$

ALSO, PLEASE START THE SIMULATIONS FROM OUR NEW PROPOSED $p_{-1}$ VALUES FOR EACH OF THE TWO
PROPOSED STATIONARY $\pi^*$s.

The following code verifies this.

```{code-cell} ipython3
def solve_laffer_adapt(p_init, π_init, model, num_steps):
    m0, α, δ, g = model.m0, model.α, model.δ, model.g
    
    m_seq = np.nan * np.ones(num_steps+1) 
    π_seq = np.nan * np.ones(num_steps) 
    p_seq = np.nan * np.ones(num_steps)
    μ_seq = np.nan * np.ones(num_steps) 
    
    m_seq[1] = m0
    π_seq[0] = π_init
    p_seq[0] = p_init
        
    for t in range(1, num_steps):
        # Solve p_t
        def p_t(pt):
            return np.log(np.exp(m_seq[t]) + g * np.exp(pt)) \
                          - pt + α * ((1-δ)*(pt - p_seq[t-1]) + δ*π_seq[t-1])
        
        p_seq[t] = root(fun=p_t, x0=p_seq[t-1]).x[0]
        
        # Solve π_t
        π_seq[t] = (1-δ) * (p_seq[t]-p_seq[t-1]) + δ*π_seq[t-1]
        
        # Solve m_t
        m_seq[t+1] = np.log(np.exp(m_seq[t]) + g*np.exp(p_seq[t]))
        
        # Solve μ_t
        μ_seq[t] = m_seq[t+1] - m_seq[t]
    
    return π_seq, μ_seq, m_seq, p_seq
```

Compute limiting values starting from $p_{-1}$ associated with $\pi_l$

```{code-cell} ipython3
π_seq, μ_seq, m_seq, p_seq = solve_laffer_adapt(p_l, π_l, model, 50)

# Check steady state m_{t+1} - m_t and p_{t+1} - p_t 
print('m_{t+1} - m_t:', m_seq[-1] - m_seq[-2])
print('p_{t+1} - p_t:', p_seq[-1] - p_seq[-2])

# Check if exp(-αx) - exp(-(1 + α)x) = g
eq_g = lambda x: np.exp(-model.α * x) - np.exp(-(1 + model.α) * x)

print('eq_g == g:', np.isclose(eq_g(m_seq[-1] - m_seq[-2]), model.g))
```

Compute limiting values starting from $p_{-1}$ associated with $\pi_u$

```{code-cell} ipython3
π_seq, μ_seq, m_seq, p_seq = solve_laffer_adapt(p_u, π_u, model, 50)

# Check steady state m_{t+1} - m_t and p_{t+1} - p_t 
print('m_{t+1} - m_t:', m_seq[-1] - m_seq[-2])
print('p_{t+1} - p_t:', p_seq[-1] - p_seq[-2])

# Check if exp(-αx) - exp(-(1 + α)x) = g
eq_g = lambda x: np.exp(-model.α * x) - np.exp(-(1 + model.α) * x)

print('eq_g == g:', np.isclose(eq_g(m_seq[-1] - m_seq[-2]), model.g))
```

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

## Slippery Side of Laffer Curve Dynamics



We are now equipped  to compute  time series starting from different $p_{-1}, \pi_{-1}^*$ settings, analogous to those in the this XXXX **money_inflation** lecture. 

HUMPHREY -- HOPEFULLY THE IMPROVED FORMULA FOR $p_{-1}$ ABOVE WILL HELP US

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [hide-cell]

def draw_iterations(p0s, m0s, model, line_params, π_bars, num_steps):
    fig, axes = plt.subplots(4, 1, figsize=(8, 10), sharex=True)

    for ax in axes[:2]:
        ax.set_yscale('log')
        
    for i, p0 in enumerate(p0s):
        for j, m0 in enumerate(m0s):
            π_seq, μ_seq, m_seq, p_seq = solve_laffer_adapt(p0, m0, model, num_steps)
            
            axes[0].plot(np.arange(num_steps), m_seq[1:], **line_params)
            axes[1].plot(np.arange(-1, num_steps-1), p_seq, **line_params)
            axes[2].plot(np.arange(-1, num_steps-1), π_seq, **line_params)
            axes[3].plot(np.arange(num_steps), μ_seq, **line_params)
            
    axes[2].axhline(y=π_bars[0], color='grey', linestyle='--', lw=1.5, alpha=0.6)
    axes[2].axhline(y=π_bars[1], color='grey', linestyle='--', lw=1.5, alpha=0.6)
    axes[2].text(num_steps * 1.07, π_bars[0], '$\pi_l$', verticalalignment='center', 
                     color='grey', size=10)
    axes[2].text(num_steps * 1.07, π_bars[1], '$\pi_u$', verticalalignment='center', 
                         color='grey', size=10)

    axes[0].set_ylabel('$m_t$')
    axes[1].set_ylabel('$p_t$')
    axes[2].set_ylabel('$\pi_t$')
    axes[3].set_ylabel('$\mu_t$')
    axes[3].set_xlabel('timestep')
    axes[3].xaxis.set_major_locator(MaxNLocator(integer=True))

    plt.tight_layout()
    plt.show()
```

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

Let's simulate the result generated by setting the initial $p_{-1}$ to $p_{-1}^l$

```{code-cell} ipython3
ps = np.linspace(p_l, p_u, 10) 
πs = np.linspace(π_l, π_u, 10)

line_params = {'lw': 1.5, 
              'marker': 'o',
              'markersize': 3}
              
π_bars = (π_l, π_u)
draw_iterations([p_l], πs, model, line_params, π_bars, num_steps=60)
```

Next we simulate the result generated by setting the initial $p_{-1}$ to $p_{-1}^u$

```{code-cell} ipython3
draw_iterations([p_u], πs, model, line_params, π_bars, num_steps=60)
```

Commit message:

Tom's latest March 16 edits of adaptive Laffer curve lecture

lectures/laffer_adaptive.md, after:

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

# Inflation Rate Laffer Curves  with Adaptive Expectations 

## Overview

This lecture studies stationary and dynamic **Laffer curves** in the inflation tax rate in a non-linear version of the model studied in this XXXX lecture.

As in lecture XXXXX, this lecture uses the log-linear version of the demand function for money that Cagan {cite}`Cagan` used in his classic paper in place of the linear demand function used in this XXXX lecture.

But now, instead of assuming  ''rational expectations'' in the form of ''perfect foresight'',
we'll adopt the ''adaptive expectations'' assumption used by Cagan {cite}`Cagan`.



This means that instead of assuming that expected inflation $\pi_t^*$ is described by

$$
\pi_t^* = p_{t+1} - p_t
$$ 

as we assumed in lecture XXXX, we'll now assume that $\pi_t^*$ is determined by the adaptive expectations scheme described in equation {eq}`eq:adaptex`  reported below. 

## The Model

Let  

  * $m_t$ be the log of the money supply at the beginning of time $t$
  * $p_t$ be the log of the price level at time $t$
  * $\pi_t^*$ be the public's expectation of the rate of inflation between $t$ and $t+1$ 
  

The law of motion of the money supply is

$$ 
\exp(m_{t+1}) - \exp(m_t) = g \exp(p_t) 
$$ (eq:msupply)


where $g$ is the part of government expenditures financed by printing money.

Notice that equation {eq}`eq:msupply` implies that

$$
m_{t+1} = \log[ \exp(m_t) + g \exp(p_t)]
$$ (eq:msupply2)

The demand function for money is 

$$
m_{t+1} - p_t = -\alpha \pi_t^* 
$$ (eq:mdemand)

where $\alpha \geq 0$.  



Expectations of inflation are governed by 

$$
\pi_{t}^* = (1-\delta) (p_t - p_{t-1}) + \delta \pi_{t-1}^*
$$ (eq:adaptex)

where $\delta \in (0,1)$


## Computing An Equilibrium Sequence 

Equation the expressions for $m_{t+1}$ promided  by {eq}`eq:mdemand` and {eq}`eq:msupply2` and use equation {eq}`eq:adaptex` to eliminate $\pi_t^*$ to obtain
the following equation for $p_t$:

$$
\log[ \exp(m_t) + g \exp(p_t)] - p_t = -\alpha [(1-\delta) (p_t - p_{t-1}) + \delta \pi_{t-1}^*]
$$ (eq:pequation)


**Pseudo-code**

Here is pseudo code for our algorithm.

Starting at time $0$ with initial conditions $(m_0, \pi_{-1}^*, p_{-1})$, for each $t \geq 0$
deploy the following steps in order:

* solve {eq}`eq:pequation` for $p_t$
* solve equation {eq}`eq:adaptex` for $\pi_t^*$ 
* solve equation {eq}`eq:msupply2` for $m_{t+1}$

This completes the algorithm.


## Claims or Conjectures
  
  
It will turn out that 

 * if they exist, limiting values $\overline \pi$ and $\overline \mu$ will be equal
 
 * if  limiting values exists, there are two possible limiting values, one high, one low
 
 * unlike the outcome in lecture XXXX, for almost all initial log price levels and expected inflation rates $p_0, \pi_{t}^*$, the limiting $\overline \pi = \overline \mu$ is  the **lower** steady state  value
 
 * for each of the two possible limiting values $\bar \pi$ ,there is a unique initial log price level $p_0$ that implies that $\pi_t = \mu_t = \bar \mu$ for all  $t \geq 0$
 
    * this unique initial log price level solves $\log(\exp(m_0) + g \exp(p_0)) - p_0 = - \alpha \bar \pi $
    
    * the preceding equation for $p_0$ comes from $m_1 - p_0 = -  \alpha \bar \pi$

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

## Limiting Values of Inflation Rate

As in our earlier lecture XXXX, we can compute the two prospective limiting values for $\bar \pi$ by studying the steady-state Laffer curve.

Thus, in a  **steady state** 

$$
m_{t+1} - m_t = p_{t+1} - p_t =  x \quad \forall t ,
$$

where $x > 0 $ is a common rate of growth of logarithms of the money supply and price level.

A few lines of algebra yields the following equation that $x$ satisfies

$$
\exp(-\alpha x) - \exp(-(1 + \alpha) x) = g 
$$ (eq:steadypi)

where we require that

$$
g \leq \max_{x: x \geq 0} \exp(-\alpha x) - \exp(-(1 + \alpha) x) ,  
$$ (eq:revmax)

so that it is feasible to finance $g$ by printing money.

The left side of {eq}`eq:steadypi` is steady state revenue raised by printing money.

The right side of {eq}`eq:steadypi` is the quantity  of time $t$ goods  that the government raises by printing money. 

Soon  we'll plot  the left and right sides of equation {eq}`eq:steadypi`.

But first we'll write code that computes a steady-state
$\bar \pi$.



Let's start by importing some  libraries

```{code-cell} ipython3
from collections import namedtuple
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from matplotlib.ticker import MaxNLocator
from matplotlib.cm import get_cmap
from matplotlib.colors import to_rgba
import matplotlib
from scipy.optimize import root, fsolve
```

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

Let's create a `namedtuple` to store the parameters of the model

```{code-cell} ipython3
LafferAdaptive = namedtuple('LafferAdaptive', 
                        ["m0",  # log of the money supply at t=0
                         "α",   # sensitivity of money demand
                         "g",   # government expenditure
                         "δ"])

# Create a Cagan Laffer model
def create_model(α=0.5, m0=np.log(100), g=0.35, δ=0.9):
    return LafferAdaptive(α=α, m0=m0, g=g, δ=δ)

model = create_model()
```

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

Now we write code that computes steady-state $\bar \pi$s.

```{code-cell} ipython3
# Define formula for π_bar
def solve_π(x, α, g):
    return np.exp(-α * x) - np.exp(-(1 + α) * x) - g

def solve_π_bar(model, x0):
    π_bar = fsolve(solve_π, x0=x0, xtol=1e-10, args=(model.α, model.g))[0]
    return π_bar

# Solve for the two steady state of π
π_l = solve_π_bar(model, x0=0.6)
π_u = solve_π_bar(model, x0=3.0)
print(f'The two steady state of π are: {π_l, π_u}')
```

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

We find two steady state $\bar \pi$ values

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

## Steady State Laffer Curve

The following figure plots the steady state Laffer curve together with the two stationary inflation rates.

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
mystnb:
  figure:
    caption: Seigniorage as function of steady state inflation. The dashed brown lines
      indicate $\pi_l$ and $\pi_u$.
    name: laffer_curve_nonlinear
    width: 500px
---
def compute_seign(x, α):
    return np.exp(-α * x) - np.exp(-(1 + α) * x) 

def plot_laffer(model, πs):
    α, g = model.α, model.g
    
    # Generate π values
    x_values = np.linspace(0, 5, 1000)

    # Compute corresponding seigniorage values for the function
    y_values = compute_seign(x_values, α)

    # Plot the function
    plt.plot(x_values, y_values, 
            label=f'$exp((-{α})x) - exp(- (1- {α}) x)$')
    for π, label in zip(πs, ['$\pi_l$', '$\pi_u$']):
        plt.text(π, plt.gca().get_ylim()[0]*2, 
                 label, horizontalalignment='center',
                 color='brown', size=10)
        plt.axvline(π, color='brown', linestyle='--')
    plt.axhline(g, color='red', linewidth=0.5, 
                linestyle='--', label='g')
    plt.xlabel('$\pi$')
    plt.ylabel('seigniorage')
    plt.legend()
    plt.grid(True)
    plt.show()

# Steady state Laffer curve
plot_laffer(model, (π_l, π_u))
```

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

## Associated Initial Price Levels


 Now that we have our hands on the two possible steady states, we can compute two initial log price levels $p_{-1}$, which as initial conditions, imply that $\pi_t = \bar \pi $ for all $t \geq 0$.

In particular, to initiate a fixed point of the dynamic Laffer curve dynamics we set 

$$
p_{-1} = m_0 + \alpha \pi^*
$$

```{code-cell} ipython3
def solve_p_init(model, π_star):
    m0, α = model.m0, model.α
    return m0 + α*π_star


# Compute two initial price levels associated with π_l and π_u
p_l, p_u = map(lambda π: solve_p_init(model, π), (π_l, π_u))
print('Associated initial p_{-1}s', f'are: {p_l, p_u}')
```

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

### Verification 



To start, let's write some code to verify that if we initial  $\pi_{-1}^*,p_{-1}$ appropriately, the inflation rate $\pi_t$ will be constant for all $t \geq 0$ (at either $\pi_u$ or $\pi_l$ depending on the initial condition)



The following code verifies this.

```{code-cell} ipython3
def solve_laffer_adapt(p_init, π_init, model, num_steps):
    m0, α, δ, g = model.m0, model.α, model.δ, model.g
    
    m_seq = np.nan * np.ones(num_steps+1) 
    π_seq = np.nan * np.ones(num_steps) 
    p_seq = np.nan * np.ones(num_steps)
    μ_seq = np.nan * np.ones(num_steps) 
    
    m_seq[1] = m0
    π_seq[0] = π_init
    p_seq[0] = p_init
        
    for t in range(1, num_steps):
        # Solve p_t
        def p_t(pt):
            return np.log(np.exp(m_seq[t]) + g * np.exp(pt)) \
                          - pt + α * ((1-δ)*(pt - p_seq[t-1]) + δ*π_seq[t-1])
        
        p_seq[t] = root(fun=p_t, x0=p_seq[t-1]).x[0]
        
        # Solve π_t
        π_seq[t] = (1-δ) * (p_seq[t]-p_seq[t-1]) + δ*π_seq[t-1]
        
        # Solve m_t
        m_seq[t+1] = np.log(np.exp(m_seq[t]) + g*np.exp(p_seq[t]))
        
        # Solve μ_t
        μ_seq[t] = m_seq[t+1] - m_seq[t]
    
    return π_seq, μ_seq, m_seq, p_seq
```

Compute limiting values starting from $p_{-1}$ associated with $\pi_l$

```{code-cell} ipython3
π_seq, μ_seq, m_seq, p_seq = solve_laffer_adapt(p_l, π_l, model, 50)

# Check steady state m_{t+1} - m_t and p_{t+1} - p_t 
print('m_{t+1} - m_t:', m_seq[-1] - m_seq[-2])
print('p_{t+1} - p_t:', p_seq[-1] - p_seq[-2])

# Check if exp(-αx) - exp(-(1 + α)x) = g
eq_g = lambda x: np.exp(-model.α * x) - np.exp(-(1 + model.α) * x)

print('eq_g == g:', np.isclose(eq_g(m_seq[-1] - m_seq[-2]), model.g))
```

Compute limiting values starting from $p_{-1}$ associated with $\pi_u$

```{code-cell} ipython3
π_seq, μ_seq, m_seq, p_seq = solve_laffer_adapt(p_u, π_u, model, 50)

# Check steady state m_{t+1} - m_t and p_{t+1} - p_t 
print('m_{t+1} - m_t:', m_seq[-1] - m_seq[-2])
print('p_{t+1} - p_t:', p_seq[-1] - p_seq[-2])

# Check if exp(-αx) - exp(-(1 + α)x) = g
eq_g = lambda x: np.exp(-model.α * x) - np.exp(-(1 + model.α) * x)

print('eq_g == g:', np.isclose(eq_g(m_seq[-1] - m_seq[-2]), model.g))
```

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

## Slippery Side of Laffer Curve Dynamics



We are now equipped  to compute  time series starting from different $p_{-1}, \pi_{-1}^*$ settings, analogous to those in the this XXXX **money_inflation** lecture. 

HUMPHREY -- MARCH 16 MODIFICATION OF CHOICE OF "PERTURBED" INITIAL CONDITIONS $p_{-1}, \pi_{-1}^*$

PLEASE RESTRICT THE PERTURBATIONS AS FOLLOWS.

Now we'll study how outcomes unfold when we start $p_{-1}, \pi_{-1}^*$ away from a stationary point of the dynamic Laffer curve, i.e., away from either $\pi_u$ or $ \pi_l$.

To construct a perturbation pair $\check p_{-1}, \check \pi_{-1}^*$we'll implement the following pseudo code:

* set $\check \pi_{-1}^* $ not equal to one of the stationary points $\pi_u$ or $ \pi_l$.
* set $\check p_{-1} = m_0 + \alpha \check \pi_{-1}^*$

Do this "cautiously" around each of the fixed points $\pi_u$ or $ \pi_l$.

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [hide-cell]

def draw_iterations(p0s, m0s, model, line_params, π_bars, num_steps):
    fig, axes = plt.subplots(4, 1, figsize=(8, 10), sharex=True)

    for ax in axes[:2]:
        ax.set_yscale('log')
        
    for i, p0 in enumerate(p0s):
        for j, m0 in enumerate(m0s):
            π_seq, μ_seq, m_seq, p_seq = solve_laffer_adapt(p0, m0, model, num_steps)
            
            axes[0].plot(np.arange(num_steps), m_seq[1:], **line_params)
            axes[1].plot(np.arange(-1, num_steps-1), p_seq, **line_params)
            axes[2].plot(np.arange(-1, num_steps-1), π_seq, **line_params)
            axes[3].plot(np.arange(num_steps), μ_seq, **line_params)
            
    axes[2].axhline(y=π_bars[0], color='grey', linestyle='--', lw=1.5, alpha=0.6)
    axes[2].axhline(y=π_bars[1], color='grey', linestyle='--', lw=1.5, alpha=0.6)
    axes[2].text(num_steps * 1.07, π_bars[0], '$\pi_l$', verticalalignment='center', 
                     color='grey', size=10)
    axes[2].text(num_steps * 1.07, π_bars[1], '$\pi_u$', verticalalignment='center', 
                         color='grey', size=10)

    axes[0].set_ylabel('$m_t$')
    axes[1].set_ylabel('$p_t$')
    axes[2].set_ylabel('$\pi_t$')
    axes[3].set_ylabel('$\mu_t$')
    axes[3].set_xlabel('timestep')
    axes[3].xaxis.set_major_locator(MaxNLocator(integer=True))

    plt.tight_layout()
    plt.show()
```

+++ {"user_expressions": []}

Let's simulate the result generated by setting the initial $p_{-1}$ to $p_{-1}^l$

```{code-cell} ipython3
ps = np.linspace(p_l, p_u, 10) 
πs = np.linspace(π_l, π_u, 10)

line_params = {'lw': 1.5, 
              'marker': 'o',
              'markersize': 3}
              
π_bars = (π_l, π_u)
draw_iterations([p_l], πs, model, line_params, π_bars, num_steps=60)
```

Next we simulate the result generated by setting the initial $p_{-1}$ to $p_{-1}^u$

```{code-cell} ipython3
draw_iterations([p_u], πs, model, line_params, π_bars, num_steps=60)
```
